---
layout: post
title: Alice And B*b
---

Alice still thought about B\*b.  She called him that in her head, with
only a single letter censored.  It was wrong, maybe, but nobody could
stop her.  She lived in the freest country in the world.

She was thinking of him now, as she stood at the window of her 50th
story apartment with a cup of tea.  A new housing block was going up
across the street.  She was happy her rent would stop rising so fast,
but was smart enough not to mention it to anyone.  New housing
developments were a tricky subject, ethically speaking.  It was why
she was thinking of B\*b.

B\*b had been a teacher of hers at uni.  One of her favorites.  His
subject had been economics, she was sure of that.  His specialty was a
little hazy all these years later.

Her notes from his classes were unreliable.  She stored them in the
cloud, like a sane person.  Her provider had decided to scrub B\*b
from the platform after what he did.  It was their right, of course.
They lived in the freest country in the world, who could deny their
right to control their platform?  But for some reason it still irked
her.

She'd gone back to read her notes about demand curves in inelastic
housing markets, trying to decide what to think about the new housing
block.  In retrospect the warning signs about B\*b had been there all
along.  His lectures were full of math and data, with not a word
devoted to housing ethics.  The silence was conspicuous.

Her notes were dotted with little \*s where letters had been.  Never
censoring anything important, of course.  All the facts were still
there.  All the proofs were just as true.  The only things missing
were her professor's name, any preferences or opinions, his department
or the subject of any papers he'd written...

It irked her, it did, even if it shouldn't.  She'd considered
switching to another provider for her notes.  But no, the words were
already lost.  And besides, her internet uplink had dropped support
for everything except the big three.  Sensible really, and clearly
within their rights.  In this one case, though, it was a little
annoying, because the big three had all scrubbed B\*b within about a
week of each other.

Out of curiosity, she'd gone looking for his lectures.  Or, well, they
weren't really *his* lectures anymore.  She'd watched one or two, and
while the content was the same, B\*b himself was nowhere to be found.
A neural net had neatly substituted another teacher.  A too-beautiful
woman with long blonde hair and chestnut skin stood in front of the
whiteboard, speaking B\*b's words in her own voice.

There were a few seams in the videos.  Her hands looked wrong when
they picked up her water bottle.  The pacing of the words didn't quite
match what she wrote on the board.  But overall it was remarkably
good.  B\*b was gone, and nothing was lost.

Whatever he did must have been bad.  They didn't break out the neural
net treatment for just anyone.  She'd tried to look up what he'd done,
but the search engine her uplink partnered wtih just spat back
warnings when she typed in his name.  She'd tried asking a former
classmate she kept in touch with, being careful to censor the name
until it was just barely recognizable, but the messages still refused
to send.

Maybe she could talk to someone in person?  But that would be stupid.
It was winter, and there was a new variant of SCXIX spreading.  It
wasn't worth the risk of infection just to ask questions she probably
shouldn't even be asking.  She hadn't been outside in three months.
She wasn't going to make an exception for idle curiosity.

Besides, she didn't want anyone thinking she was sympathetic to
whatever he'd done.  It was a thin line between asking what someone
had done and asking whether or not what they'd done was actually all
that bad.  And *that* was basically apologism.  Just the thought made
her fingers tense around her cup of tea.

If he'd done something bad enough, apologism would get her fired.  Her
company could hire whoever they wanted, why would they employ an
apologist?  It would get her kicked out of her apartment when the
lease was up in a few months.  Renter's protections were usually
pretty strict about that sort of thing, but why should her neighbors
be forced to live next to an apologist?

The platforms were slow and bureaucratic enough that she'd probably
have enough time to get in touch with friends and family before they
booted her.  They really needed to work on that.  It was
unconscionable that apologists could skate by for weeks or months
before action was taken.

After a moment's thought, Alice frowned at herself.  She was being too
loose with her thoughts.  Words had power, even if she never spoke
them aloud.  Fond thoughts of B\*b might fester until they morphed
into apologism.  She lived in the freest country in the world, which
meant she was responsible for her own actions.  She didn't need to
think about \*\*\*.  Whatever he'd done, he deserved to be forgotten.
