---
layout: crescat
title: 1.03 Lies I
---

"Look," Rose said, grabbing the bars again.  Bormor's eyes were
flicking between her and the machine, like he wasn't sure whether to
be more worried about her touching it, or about moving closer to stop
her.

"It only rotates counterclockwise.  There's bars mounted in the wall
on the left that mesh with it, but no bars on the right.  So if you
walk forward on the right...

She pushed the bars in front of her, moving counterclockwise with
them.  There were more bars a foot or so behind her, placed every
thirty degrees along the axis.  As she walked, she passed on the right
side of the pole, emerging on the other side of the circular area.

"See!  You pass through.  But if I try to go back..."

She tried to walk back the way she'd come, and the ratchet stuck, the
bars refusing to move more than a hair.

"I see," Boromir said.  "And if you tried to pass through on the other
side, you'd get trapped by the bars from the wall.  You can pass
through one way but not the other."

Rose nodded happily, before realizing the others weren't following.
"Well?" she said.

"Rose..." Alexandria said, rubbing her eyes.  "Now you're trapped on
that side."

"Well, of course.  This is where we're going."

"But you could've at least *thought* about it for half a second!"
Alexandria threw her hands in the air.  Rose shrank back a bit.  "Just
half a second!  That's all I ask!  That decision was *permanent*, and
now the rest of us have to make it knowing that you're--"

As she was talking, Dexter casually walked past her and started
pushing through the machine himself.

Alexandria let out an inarticulate gurgle.

"You can go back if you want," he said, not sounding terribly
concerned.  "But Rose and I can't.  It's forward or nothing.  The trap
was sprung on us long ago."

"Melodramatic little bugger," Boromir muttered under his breath.
Dexter didn't bother to respond.

In the end, they all followed.

---

It took a little bit of doing to get Robin's trunk through, but
finally they were all on the other side of the trap.

Rose had been exploring the room while the others were busy.  It
reminded her of a cell, if cells were built to impress.  The ceilings
were high, more than twenty feet in the air, giving the room an
ominous feeling.  There were raised stone baffles in one corner, that
could be passed through by weaving back and forth, but which blocked
line of sight.  Behind the baffles was a tiny shaft, too small to
squeeze through, heading straight down.

To the left of the way they'd come in, there were two exits running in
parallel.  Between the two exits was something carved in the wall, but
Boromir had the torch and she couldn't make it out.  The curiosity
would have eaten her alive, but there were other things to explore.

In the middle of the room was a stone fountain running with clear
water, which seemed plainly impossible.  The river was hundreds of
feet below them; the amount of water pressure you'd need to raise it
up here was...well, hm, rivers were heavy, maybe it was reasonable
actually.  The tower had to get water somehow, she supposed.  But it
implied an incredibly amount of craft in the mountain around them.

She wanted to poke and prod at the fountain, but she'd been distracted
by the most surprising feature: a window.  One side of the room had an
enormous square cut out and grated with shining metal bars,
contributing to the atmosphere of oppulent detainment.  They had
apparently walked at an angle that had brought them to a different
side of the mountain.  More importantly, the view was stunning.

Rose rested her forehead on the bars, drinking in the moonlit
landscape with her eyes.  She'd never been this high in her life.  It
gave her a strange, heady feeling, a sense of wonder that felt oddly
nostalgic.  It was what she imagined it must have felt like to see
lightning, or a sunrise, for the first time when she'd been young, a
fundamental experience so old it had lost its magic.  But up here,
seeing the whole world laid out below her, the beauty felt as fresh as
the wind on her face.

She reached her hand through her cloak, absently, fingering each of
her treasures in turn, but none seemed quite right for the moment.
Not stone, not iron, not glass.  Wood was the closest, but not quite.
Perhaps she should find a fifth, in some hidden place, for moments
like these.

"Rose!" called a voice from behind her.  *Not Dad,* she reminded
herself, the moment dulling a little.  She turned back from the
window.  She'd spent her whole life with her Dad calling after her
when she got lost in thought.  Nobody else usually cared enough to
interrupt her.  It was a sad thought, but for some reason it put a
smile on her face as she walked back toward the group.

"Looks like we're meant to rest here," Alexandria said when she
rejoined them.  "It's late; let's get some sleep and continue in the
morning."

"What about food?" Robin asked from where he sat on his trunk.

Alexandria cocked an eyebrow.  "You didn't bring any?"

"It was a short trip," Robin said, folding his arms.  "I assumed
there'd be food when we got here.  They gave us water, didn't they?
What sort of uncivilized place doesn't have anything to eat?"

Alexandria sighed, kneading her brow.

"You can have some of mine," Rose piped up.  Everyone turned to look
at her.  "I have plenty."

"In that tiny little bag?" Boromir asked.  Rose looked down at the
side satchel she kept under her cloak.  It wasn't all *that* much, but
she was a light eater.

"It's mostly pemmican," she said.  "I have plenty."

"Of course it is," Dexter drawled.  "Let me guess, you found a list of
travel food organized by caloric density, and stuffed your bag with
the one at the top of the list?"

"Er," Rose said.  "Where would you find a list like that?"

Dexter rolled his eyes.

"Great," Alexandria said.  "If we make good time it won't be a
problem.  I can spare some food too, Robin, if you don't mind a little
stale bread.  Boromir and I have been on the road for a while."

Robin sniffed, but wasn't so ill-mannered as to outright complain.
"Thanks," he said, without much energy.

"Pemmican, pemmican," Esper broke in.  "What an odd word.  Where does
it come from?  It doesn't sound like western tongue."

"Er," Rose said.  "I don't know."

"What does it mean?"

"It's, uh, it's a way of preparing fats and meats so they don't rot,"
Rose said.  The exact recipe escaped her.  "Sometimes there's berries
in it, too.  It's OK for road food."

"Hm," Esper said thoughtfully.  "Pemmican.  Pem-i-can.  Pemmmmmmican."
She wandered away, repeating the word to herself, exploring how it
felt in her mouth.

"...well," Alexandria said.  "Like I said, let's try to get some
sleep.  Food first, lights out in a bit?"

"The torch is almost dead," Boromir noted.  "I don't know where our
excellent navigator got it, for it to have lasted even this long."

"Probably tower-made," Alexandria said.

"Probably, probably.  Let's eat while it's still burning."

---

Robin took a bite of the pemmican Rose handed him, chewing once,
twice, then screwing up his face.

"This is vile."

Rose smiled, taking a bite herself.  "It's not that bad," she said.

"Ugh.  It's cloying.  It feels like it's coating my teeth in lard."

"Tallow, actually.  Lard is from pork."

"Wonderful."  Robin swallowed, with visible effort.

Rose moved to take a seat beside Robin on his trunk, but the boy
tensed up protectively.  She sat cross-legged on the ground, instead.
Her cloak was so thick it was almost comfy.

Alexandria and Boromir had the torch, and were eating together on the
other side of the room, talking animatedly.  Esper sat with them,
interjecting occasionally, apparently content being the third wheel.
Dexter crouched by himself near the window, staring out of it much
like Rose had.  She chewed on her lower lip a tiny bit, wondering if
she should join him.  He was a little scary, but the view was *so*
amazing...

Robin held his hand out, opening and closing it in a grasping gesture.
Rose broke off another piece of pemmican for him, putting it in his
palm.  She licked the cold grease off her fingers while he ate, not
that it got them very clean.

Robin didn't speak up.  Rose wasn't really great at starting
conversations, but the silence was getting more than a little awkward.
She fidgeted with her cloak, and her fingers found the pocket that hid
her iron, almost by accident.

"So," she said.  "That's, um, a lot of books in your trunk."

"Mhmm."

"Where'd you get them all?"

Robin waited a long time before responding.  "From my father."

"Your dad must be an amazing scholar."

Robin snorted, his mouth tightening a little.

"Hey!  Speaking of, actually, I was wondering.  If it wouldn't be too
much trouble, do you think I could maybe have a peek at..."

"Could you leave me alone?  I know it's rude, but I'm not really up
for talking."

"Oh!  Oh, uh, sure.  Sorry."

Rose stood up, feeling her cheeks get a little pink.  She hadn't
realized she'd been imposing.  Maybe she'd been the one making the
silence awkward?  She straightened her cloak a little and turned to
walk away.  Behind her, Robin sighed.

"Rose..." he said.  She turned back to look at him.  "You're fine."
She smiled at him, tentatively, and he didn't return it.  He wiped his
greasy hands on his pants, not looking up at her, and she turned away
again.

She looked at her other three options.

There was a dark corner, where she could go curl up early and get some
sleep.  The thought was tempting; it wasn't *that* late, but she was
tired from all the excitement.

There was Alexandria, Esper, and Boromir, talking animatedly in the
light from the torch.  Alexandria was telling some sort of story, and
Boromir was laughing uproariously every few sentences.  She felt her
lips quirk up a little bit.  It was good they still had family, here.

And then there was Dexter, cast in silhouette by the silvery moonlight
that poured through the window, staring quietly out at the world.
Strangely enough, she found herself walking toward him.  It *was* an
amazing view, she supposed.  It wasn't that strange she wanted another
look.

---

"Of course you'd join me," Dexter said, not looking at her.  "Obvious,
really."

Rose plopped down next to him.  He didn't edge over to give her room,
but it was a big window, and she could see alright.  "How did you know
it was me?"

"Your footsteps."

"My footsteps?"

"The length of your stride, and the sound of your cloak against your
clothes.  It's heavy cloth."  Dexter had his hands wrapped around the
metal bars, his eyes tracing something outside the window.

"Why?"

"Hm?"

"Why were you paying attention to that?"

"I pay attention to everything.  What were you paying attention to,
while we were walking through that dark hallway with nothing to do?"

"Oh, uh, that makes sense I guess.  I was just, I dunno, thinking."

"'Thinking,' she says."  Dexter grinned, for some reason, still
looking away from her out the window.  The moonlight caught his
teeth.  "I suppose you would be."

She didn't really know how to respond to that.

"So, uh, what are you looking at?"

"You ask too many questions."

Rose looked away, swallowing.  Was she imposing again?  What a stupid
question, of course she was.  He'd been sitting over here alone for a
reason.

"Everyone in their place," Dexter murmered.  "Like a homily, or the
setup to a joke."

"What?"

"The surly child alone with his books.  The social butterflies
circling each other, around and around.  The scholar observing her
subjects.  Me, by the window, alone with the world.  And you," he
turned to her, "flitting around, being a bother."  He grinned again,
wider.

Rose frowned, crossing her arms.  "There's no need to be mean," she
said.  "I can leave you alone."

"You didn't spend much time with people, growing up, did you?"

"Er..." Rose said, a little off-kilter.  "No, I guess not.  Just my
dad, mostly."

"No other kids in your tiny smudge of a village?"

"We, uh, didn't get along.  Mostly.  They thought my mom was a witch,
when we were younger, and when we were older they were so *boring*, we
didn't have anything to talk about..."  She trailed off, realizing she
was rambling.  Why was she telling him all this?  "How did you guess?"

"Like I said, I pay attention to things.  The way you talk to people,
the way you're too friendly and too shy at the same time.  It's
obvious."

Rose glanced down at the ground.  *Was* it really that obvious?  Or
was he just taking lucky shots?  They'd had a traveling mentalist come
through their town, once, and she'd spent enough time watching him to
learn some of the tricks.  He'd throw things out, vague claims that
could apply to anyone, and watch people's faces to see what stuck,
building on that until it seemed like he knew things he couldn't
possibly have figured out.

"You're clever, though," Dexter said.  "You'll figure it out."  He
rose from the window, stretching his arms behind his back.  "I'm done
here.  You should get some rest before our adventures in the morning."

---

Rose came to consciousness with a sharp shock, instantly awake.
Mornings were always like that for her, zero to a hundred with nothing
in-between.

Light shone through the hood of her cloak where it draped over her
eyes, filling her field of view with a red glow.  Rose rolled over,
feeling the stone under her.  She'd slept on a rock?  Why would...

The previous day came flooding back, and she threw off her hood,
taking in the sight of their sun-drenched cell.  Apparently the window
faced east, because sunlight was bearing down on them through it.

Most of the others were awake already, which made her a little peeved.
She was usually an early riser.  None of them had hoods to cover their
eyes, though, so the first rays of light must have roused them.  The
only exception was Boromir, who was still snoozing in a corner,
nestled in with his and Alexandria's packs.

Rose bounced to her feet, feeling the new day flow through her like a
jolt.  There were things to *do*.

"Finally up?" Alexandria asked.  She had changed shirts, and was
kneeling by the fountain with her hair tied back, a pile of clothes
next to her.  Doing the washing?  The sun shining through her hair
made it look *amazing*.  She was athletic, and pretty in a
square-jawed sort of way that worked for the scene.

Rose skipped over, bobbing her head down for a drink from the falling
stream of water.  It was shockingly cold, and more of it got on her
shirt than in her mouth.  She giggled.

"Well, you're in a great mood," Alexandria said.  She wrang out a wet
shirt in her hands, her biceps standing out visibly.  "Good night's
sleep?"

"I guess.  My cloak is comfy."

"Mhmm.  Should've thought to bring one, but it was still summer when
we started on the road."

"I don't really get warm that easily.  Too skinny I guess."

Rose splashed some more water on her face, just to feel it.

She looked around the room.  Esper was nowhere to be seen, but she
could hear the other girl humming from the rest area in the corner.
Robin was by his trunk, which was open, rummaging through his books
with an annoyed look on his face.  Rose resisted the urge to run over
and gawk.  He seemed protective of his books, no need to spook him.

"Where's Dexter?" she asked.

"He's back the way we came in.  Didn't seem to like the sun waking him
up, swore up a storm and stumbled off that way still half-asleep.
It's a little darker back there I guess.  Have you read the
inscription yet?"

Rose looked over at the carving near the two exits.  In the daylight,
she could see three faces, with a wall of text below them.  The
burning curiosity she'd felt the night before roared back.

"Let me finish this and I'll go wake up the boys," Alexandria said,
turning back to her work.

Rose looked back at her, considering.  She could give Alexandria a
hand.  She could also go see what Robin was doing, spy on his books.
The view out the window would be even more fantastic than last night,
if the sun wasn't directly in her eyes.  Or she could go look for
Dexter, maybe wake him up for real.

She shook herself from her thoughts, and found that her feet had
already carried her to the two exits with the carving between them.

She saw three faces, each identical.  They were pressed into the wall,
and it produced the same eerie effect as the one on the door outside,
as if the eyes were following her as she moved.  But in the light of
morning, it was harder to feel unsettled.

The faces looked almost human, but they were too thin, and the pupils
were slitted.  Where their mouths would be, there were instead three
small circles of metal, with tiny holes no wider than a pin punched
through them.

Below the faces lay an inscription:

```
Two paths, but only one leads to the tower.
Three sisters, heirs to the circle of lies.
One diligent, who speaks only falsehood.
One rebelious, who speaks only truth.
One clever, who answers as she will.
(Although perhaps not in that order.)
You may ask one question of each,
And they will answer Da or Ba,
Their words for Yes and No.
(Although perhaps not in that order.)
```

Rose rocked backward and forward on her heels.  That certainly made it
a little less hard to feel unsettled.

---

"I don't know," Dexter snapped.  "Why would you think I know?"  He
shot Alexandria a glare, massaging his temples.  In the full light of
day, Rose could see that he was a bit of a mess.  His clothes were
worn and muddy from the road, and his hair was a tangle of greasy
clumps that fell over his forehead.  She wondered if there was a
polite way to suggest he dunk his head in the fountain.

Alexandria shrugged, dropping it.  "What do you think, Boromir?"

"Mrghl," her brother replied.  He was standing on his feet, so Rose
supposed he was *technically* awake, but he had one eye closed and the
other was fighting to join it.  "S'fine mbrugh."

Alexandria rolled her eyes and elbowed him in the ribs, which didn't
even make him wince.  "Robin!" she called.

"I'm busy!" he called back, still rummaging through his trunk on the
other side of the room.  He mumbled something under his breath that
Rose didn't catch.

Alexandria sighed.

They had *finally* managed to gather almost everyone in front of the
inscription to talk about it.  In theory.

"What do *you* think?" Rose asked.

"I think it's pretty straightforward," Alexandria replied.  "The most
conservative reading says we get to ask three yes-or-no questions, one
to each of these faces.  The face will say "Da" or "Ba", one of which
is Yes and one of which is No, but we don't know which.  One of the
faces will tell the truth, one will lie, and one will do whatever it
wants.  We should presumably ask them which path leads to the tower.
Or whether the left path leads to the tower, rather."

"Brilliant," Dexter said.  "It looks like you have this well in hand."
He turned to leave.

"Dexter," Alexandria said, adopting a stern voice.  "Where are you
going?  We all need to contribute."

"Do we, though?  Just let Rose solve it again.  I'm going back to
sleep."

"Dexter!  You're not going to fall asleep again now that the sun's
up, anyway."

"You underestimate me."

While his sister was distracted, Boromir leaned against the wall and
slumped down into a sitting position.  He was asleep again instantly.

"Do the sisters answer *any* question?"  Esper asked, wonder in her
voice.  "Perhaps we should seek answers to greater mysteries than
'which way should we go'."

"It's a yes or no question," Alexandria replied, still staring at
Dexter's back as he left.  "Not exactly enough to crack open the sky.
I'd rather make sure we know where to go.  The wrong path might be
deadly."

"It wouldn't work, anyway," Dexter called back as he left.  "You
really think they trapped the three heirs to the circle of lies behind
that wall to test schmucks like you?  It's just a trick."

"If they can hear us and answer our questions, there has to be *some*
sort of magic involved," Rose said.

"Magic *is* a trick."  Dexter waved his hand dismissively as he
disappeared into the dark hallway they'd originally come from.  "It's
tricks all the way down."

Rose's hands clenched.  It was a stupid thing to be irritated about,
but...aargh.  Here, of all places?

She forced her hands to open, fumbling through her cloak to find her
riverstone.  The surface was as smooth and regular as always.  Her
teeth were grinding, she realized, and she slowly let her jaw relax.

"Odd, to hear that from a stormtouched," Alexandria commented mildly.
Rose glanced over to see the other girl looking back at her with a
quirked eyebrow.

"Uh..." Rose said.  She coughed, clearing her throat.  "Yeah."

Alexandria noticed Boromir asleep on the floor, and walked over to
whack him on the back of the head.

"Blurghl...whaah?"

"Wake up, you layabout.  I guess four of us is enough."

"I found it!" Robin cried from across the room.  Rose turned to look.
The boy was smiling, maybe for the first time since she'd met him.  He
walked toward them triumphantly, carrying a small book in his hands.
Rose peered closely at it.  It was a small volume bound in black
leather, with a braided cord that wrapped around the front to keep it
closed.

The cover was embossed with silver script: "Dancing with Deception,
or, My Travels Through the Third Circle, by Raymond Solomon."

"Here," Robin said, opening it to a page near the end and holding it
up proudly for them to read.  "It's not the same, but it's *close*."
