---
layout: crescat
title: 1.04 Lies II
---

**Exerpt from *Dancing with Deception, or, My Travels Through the Third
Circle*, pg. 67.**

...I emerged from the blackened maze to find myself at the very center
of the two sisters' realm.  Twin thrones stood in repose, erected like
sentries before two circular stairwells leading down.  Perched upon
them were the sisters, both alike.  Their bottom halves were
serpentine, long scaled bodies that coiled in bundles beneath them.
From the waist up, they might have been human, but for their narrow
faces and snake-like eyes.  They were gaunt, and lay perfectly still
as I approached, only their eyes moving as they followed me.  They
induced the distinct, electric feeling of predators waiting to lunge.

I stopped a goodly distance from them, and my guide flapped up to
perch on my shoulder, whispering into my ear.  "Master," he said in
his irritating, nasally voice, "these are the two sisters, for which
this circle is named.  You must pass their trial, if you insist on
descending further into this madness."

I simply nodded, and after a long pause, the imp continued.  "One
before you is Vajra, the other Majra.  Behind them are two sets of
stairs: one leads to the fourth circle, the other to perdition.  Their
trial is thus: you may ask a single yes or no question of one of them.
Vajra will answer truthfully, while Majra will lie.  With but this
single answer, you must determine which stairwell to take.

"And which is which?" I asked.  My companion, shrugged, his thin
silver chains tinkling.

"None know." he replied.

I pondered this trial, taking my time, as one should when dealing with
the denizens of below.  I could have forced my way through with seal
and sword, but in the end I decided to play their game.  There would
be fewer metaphysical ripples to tell of my coming.

It was a simple game: a trifling, for one versed on the ways of
fiends.  I turned to the sister on the left.  "Well met," I said.  "My
question is thus: If I were to ask your sister whether the stairwell
behind you leads to the fourth circle, would she answer 'no'?"

The creature finally moved, winding back and forth in agitation.  She
spoke, the single word emerging as a low gutteral hiss: "Yesssss..."

I nodded, and proceeded toward the stairwell behind her, gripping my
seal tightly lest they renege on their game...

---

"...huh," Alexandria said.  "That *is* similar.  Why does that work?"

"Is that story true?" Rose cut in, talking over her.  She wanted to
grab the slim volume out of Robin's hands and read the whole thing
right then.  It took an enormous effort of will to keep her hands
inside her cloak, clutching at the cloth.

Alexandria turned to look at her.  "Who knows?" she asked, seeming
confused by the question.  "It's just a story."

"King Solomon was a real historical figure," Esper answered.  "Whether
he truly traveled through the nine circles of hell, who can say?  Even
if he did, I'm sure there are a thousand versions of that story.  If
the third circle he traveled through is the circle of lies--"

"It is," Robin said.

"Then we already have two conflicting accounts.  In the book there are
two sisters, in the inscription there are three.  In the book they
speak Solomon's tongue, in the inscription they speak their own."

"Maybe Da and Ba are the words in Solomon's language?" Rose said.

"No, Solomon spoke ancient Sumeric.  This is known.  Their words for
yes and no were 'heam' and 'inu'."

"But which one is true?" Rose asked, looking back and forth.  "Or is
neither true?"

Alexandria shrugged helplessly.  "Who knows?"

Esper shook her head.  "Someone might, but not us."

Robin tapped his chin.  "I've read a lot about the circles.  I'm not
sure that question really makes sense."

"What do you mean?" Rose asked.

Robin rolled his eyes.  "I mean, I don't think the circles are a real,
literal place."

"So they're just a lie?"

"No, no.  Just, like...argh, nevermind."  He slammed the book shut.

"No, wait!  Just try to explain it once?"

Robin glared back at her.

"Please?"

"Fine, fine.  Just let me think for a second."

Rose realized she was clutching the cloth of her cloak a little too
tightly.  She released it, feeling her way through to look for her
stone instead.

"Alright.  You know math, right?  They taught that wherever you grew
up?"

"My mom did."

"Mhmm.  So you know division, then?  Six divided by three is two?"

Rose resisted the urge to roll her eyes.  "Yup."

"Division is 'real', in some sense.  It lets you accomplish things in
the world.  But it isn't physical, it isn't a place you can go."

"But nobody disagrees on divison," Rose said.

"If you read one book that said five divided by zero is infinity, and
another that said five divided by zero is undefined, who's right?"

"Well, uh...hm.  I guess it depends how you want to do it.  Saying
it's equal to infinity is maybe reasonable, but it causes some
problems."

"Exactly.  Division is real, in some sense.  Two different groups of
people plopped down on opposite sides of the earth would both invent
it.  But they might define division by zero differently.  Maybe one
definition is better, but neither is lying."

Rose thought about that, turning her stone over and over in her
hands.  "But the book was talking about a real, physical place.  With
a blackened maze and a seal and a sword and talking creatures."

Robin shrugged.  "I don't know.  Now can we drop it?  I need to go put
everything back in my trunk."

Rose's eyes darted to the book in her hands.  "Can I read it?" she
blurted out.

Robin raised an eyebrow.

"There might be other hints," she said.  "If it's a whole book about
the circle of lies."

"No," he said, flatly.  "It's delicate.  Besides, I've read it five
times.  There's nothing else useful in there."  He turned around and
walked away.  Rose resisted the urge to yell after him, try to
convince him.  It would just make him dig in his heels, probably.

Rose felt a hand on her shoulder.  Alexandria gave her a friendly
squeeze.  "Let's get back on track," she said.  "The two trials seem
pretty similar.  Why did Solomon's question work?"

Rose shrugged, still distracted by the retreating book.  Esper hummed
brightly.  "Boromir?" Alexandria asked.

There was no answer.  Rose turned and saw he'd managed to sneak behind
them and slump onto the ground again, snoozing peacefully.  Alexandria
squawked indignantly and marched over to wake him up.

---

The window would be best, Rose decided.  Sunlight, fresh air, a view.
It would be like when she'd snuck off into the forest to think, in her
old life.

She needed to be alone to think.  It had always been that way.  Some
people, like Alexandria, didn't seem to be able to make progress
without someone to bounce ideas off of.  But Rose found that other
people cluttered up her head and pushed out the finer thoughts.

She fished out her notebook from deep in her cloak.  It was a bundle
of papers wrapped in an oiled skin, about half full of scribblings,
nestled in the thickest part of her cloak near the side where it would
be safe from the rain.  She took a fresh sheet and a thin piece of
charcoal, inhaled a deep breath of the morning air, and got to work.

Why did King Solomon's trick work?  Precisely, specifically?  She
started stripping out details.  He needed to ask a question that
worked regardless of whether he asked Vajra or Majra.  No, details:
call them T and F, for truth and falsehood.  That was the only thing
about them that mattered.

He asked X, the first sister, whether Y, the other sister, would
answer no to a question Q.  Say Q had the correct answer A.

So there were four possibilities.  X could be T or F, and A could be
Yes or No.  She checked all four possibilities, and yup, it worked.
He always got the right answer.

Rose raised a hand to her face, rubbing her chin.  That was *an*
answer to why what he'd done had worked.  There were four
possibilities, and it worked in all four.  But it wasn't enlightening.

She fished through her cloak for her secret splinter of driftwood.  It
was different from her other treasures: the others were hard, cold,
heavy, sturdy.  The driftwood was light, airy.  It would snap if she
pressed too hard.  She held it carefully, running her fingers over the
tiny features.

The trick was Solomon had brought both sisters into the question,
knowing that exactly one would lie.  If you asked one sister what the
other one would say, either the first sister would truthfully report
the second sister's lie, or the first sister would lie about the
second sister's truthful answer.  Either way, the answer would get
flipped exactly once.

That's why Solomon had asked if the second sister would answer "No" --
because the final answer would always be a lie.

She drew the question out on her paper.  The true answer, A, was on
the left, then an arrow took it through X, then an arrow took X's
answer through Y, and the final answer coming out on the right was
always the opposite of A.

She was starting to feel like she understood the shape of things.  She
turned to the real problem.

---

The real problem was much harder, which was probably why they got
three questions instead of one.  The obvious thing to try was asking
the first sister what the second sister would say if she was asked
what the third sister would say -- but because one of the sisters
could choose how to behave, any chain of answers like that was
unpredictable.

In some ways it was the *opposite* problem.  The first one had been
solved by constructing a chain of questioning that included both
sisters, but the harder problem required a chain of questioning that
excluded the one who could answer however she wanted.  Otherwise the
answer was always indeterminate.

She tried working it out by enumerating possibilities again.  There
were 3 sisters, so 6 possible orderings.  The answer to the question
was Yes or No, and the words Da or Ba could mean Yes and No or
vice-versa, so that made...24 possibilities to check?  She wasn't even
sure where to get started generating questions to check.

Maybe she could make the problem simpler?  She didn't even know how to
solve the three-sister problem if they answered in normal speech,
rather than their own language.  "Work on the simplest problem you
don't know the answer to," that was the advice her mother had given
her.  If the sisters answered in normal speech, there were only 12
possibilities...

---

Rose looked down at her paper, eye twitching.  She wanted to strangle
Robin.  The notes in front of her were so brightly lit she had to
squint, the sun almost directly overhead.  She'd been working for
*hours*, and it all could've been so simple, if only...

She checked it again.  Solomon *hadn't* needed to ask the first sister
what the second sister would say.  Doing that worked fine, but it was
needlessly complicated.  By putting both sisters in the question, he'd
introduced exactly one lie.  She'd been noodling around, trying to
find a solution to the three-sister problem that didn't involve asking
questions that involved all three sisters, when she'd realized that
you only needed one sister in the loop to use Solomon's trick.

Just ask either sister "What would you say if I asked you whether the
stairway behind you leads to the fourth circle?"  If the sister he was
talking to told the truth, then it was trivial to see that it worked.
If the sister he was talking to *lied*, then the two lies would cancel
out, and she'd end up answering truthfully.

It was a little twisty, but it worked.  If you were talking to the
sister that always lied, and you asked her "Does the stairway behind
you lead to the fourth circle?", and it did, she'd answer no.  So if
you asked her what she would say, she'd have to lie and say that she
would've said yes.  If the stairway didn't lead there, she'd answer
yes to the first question, so she'd have to answer no to the second.

Rose grabbed her hair.  It translated *perfectly* to the three-sister
problem, if they answered in normal speech.  Just ask each of the
three "What would you say if I asked you whether the leftmost passage
leads to the tower?"  The one that always told the truth and the one
that always lied would both answer the same, and then if the third
answer disagreed you could just throw it out.

Aaaaaaaargh.  If she hadn't heard that stupid story about stupid
Solomon and his stupid clever tricks, she wouldn't have gotten so
caught up in trying to design cycles of asking sisters what other
sisters would answer if they were asked...

Rose took a deep breath.  She released her hair, noticing she was also
squeezing her driftwood a little tightly with the other hand.  She
should take a break.  This was good progress.

She tucked her driftwood away and stood up, stretching.  It was almost
lunchtime anyway.  After a moment's thought, she tucked her notebook
away as well.  It never hurt to be safe.

Her bag was still in the corner where she'd slept.  She fished out
some pemmican, grabbing extra for Robin, and took it to the fountain
to eat.  Robin was already there, sitting alone with Alexandria.  They
were each holding an end of stale-looking bread, speaking quietly.

Their conversation trailed off as Rose approached.  Robin glanced up
at her, then looked away.  Rose felt a little clench of apprehension,
but Alexandria looked up as well with a beaming smile.  "Any
progress?" she asked.

"A little," Rose replied.  She sat down next to Alexandria, on a
diferent side than Robin, and leaned over to take a sip of the water.
She was thirstier than she'd realized.

"You're going to burn, sitting in the window like that," Alexandria
commented.

Rose looked down at her hands.  The backs were already a little pink,
and her nose probably looked similar.  "Oops," she said.

Alexandria giggled, holding a hand to her mouth.  "How do you stay so
pale living in the country, anyway?" she asked.

"It rains a lot around here," Rose said.  She looked past Alexandria
at Robin, who was still avoiding her gaze.  "And the forest is old."

"The forest is old?"

"The trees are tall and wide, they block out a lot of the sun.  Some
of it is coppiced near town, but where my Dad and I live it's old and
dark."

"You don't live in town?"

"No.  A few miles out."

"Farmers?"

"My dad's a woodworker.  Does odd jobs sometimes.  My mom..."  Rose
trailed off, looking down at her hands.  Her fingers were getting
greasy from holding the pemmican.

Alexandria smoothly changed the subject.  "Dexter's finally up.  He
slept almost until noon."

Rose looked up.  A giggle escaped her lips.  "Who sleeps that long?"

Alexandria broke eye contact, looking over Rose's shoulder.  "I don't
know.  Not even Boromir, I'll tell you that much."

"Maybe he was up late?"

"I was," said a voice behind her.  Rose jumped a little.  She turned
to see Dexter emerging from the rest area.  He looked surly, but his
eyes were sharp.  "Insomnia."

"Oh," Rose replied.  "I'm sorry."

Dexter waved his hand.  "I've never been able to sleep right," he
said.  "My thoughts tend to race, and they don't like slowing down."

"Same!  Oh my gosh, I know *exactly* what it's like.  I sleep fine,
though.  I just wake up in the morning with my head already whirling."

Dexter smiled with half his mouth, his expression hard to parse.
"Lucky you," he said.  "Figured out where we're going for us yet?"

"She's close," Alexandria broke in.  Rose felt her cheeks heat up.
That wasn't *quite* what she'd said.

"That wasn't *quite* what I said."

"How close are you, then?"

"I think I know what I'd ask if they answered in our language."

"And what's that?"

Dexter leaned over and splashed some water from the fountain onto his
face.  Great, he could use it.

"Er, you ask all three of them, 'What would you say if I asked you
whether the leftmost passage leads to the tower?', and take the
majority answer."

Dexter paused for a moment, water streaming through his hands.

"And that works?"

"Yup.  I checked it.  There's twelve possible cases, and..."

"Aren't there only six?"

"Yeah, 6 configurations of sisters, but then there's 2 configurations
of paths."

"Right."  Dexter straightened, flicking water off his hands and
blinking it from his eyes.  He didn't look even a tiny bit cleaner.
"Let me see."

"You can tell it works without checking them all because--"

"No, let me think.  OK.  Yeah, it works.  That's not a yes-or-no
question though."

"Er...isn't it?"

"'What would you say' isn't a yes-or-no question."

"It is when asking what you'd say *to* a yes-or-no question."

"Maybe.  But one sister can answer freely, right?  She could just say
whatever.  And it seems a touch fragile, even in the other case."

Ruby opened her mouth to argue, but stopped herself.  Precision,
right?  That was the key to these things?  It was pedantic, but he was
right.  In the case where one of the sisters could answer whatever she
wanted, asking what she would answer wasn't a yes-or-no question.

"Hm.  Then...I guess the question is, 'If I were to ask you whether
the leftmost passage leads to the tower, would you answer yes?'."

"Mhmm." Dexter said.  His eyes were fixed off in the distance, above
Rose's head.  She turned to look, but there was nothing there.  When
she turned back to him, he was moving his fingers awkwardly, curling
and uncurling them like he was counting in some strange system.

"Well," he said after a moment.  "That was easy, I guess.  Good job."

"Excuse me?"

"That's the whole trick.  You can't ask whether they say yes, because
they don't answer in our language.  So you ask 'If I were to ask you
whether the leftmost passage leads to the tower, would you answer Da?'
and you're done.  If a majority say Da, you take the left passage."

Rose opened her mouth, thought for a moment, then closed it.  It
couldn't be that simple, could it?  But it had the same sort of
double-negative-stacking shape as the original "what would you say if
I asked you" trick -- if Da meant Yes, it was the same question she'd
asked, and if Da meant No, then the answer to the nested question
would be No but so would the answer to the outer question...

She shook her head, the line of thought was a little bit too tangly to
hold on to.  "Are you sure it works?" she asked, looking around.  She
caught sight of Alexandria next to her, remembering the other girl was
there.  Alexandria had her chin propped up on her fist, brow wrinkled.
Rose recognized the confusion, reaching instinctively for her shard of
glass to help explain it to her...but wait.  That was weird.  Why
wasn't she already holding it while she talked to Dexter?

"Of course it works," Dexter said.  She turned back to him.  He had
his hands in his hair, trying to untangle a wet knot, a scowl on his
face.

"How do you know?"

"It's only twenty four cases.  I just checked them."

---

"Spectacular!" Boromir said, clapping Rose between the shoulder
blades..  She had to stumble forward a step to keep from falling.

"Boromir," Alexandria chided.

"Sorry, sorry.  She's a tiny thing.  But as I was saying, excellent
work!"

Rose felt her cheeks warming for the second time that day.

"She blushes a lot, too," Boromir commented.  Alexandria gave him a
sharp jab in the ribs, which he barely seemed to notice.

"Er..." Rose said, standing up and straightening her cloak.  "It was,
um...Dexter was the one who solved it."

"That lout?" Boromir asked, agape.  He seemed personally affronted by
the idea.

Alexandria elbowed him again.  "Be nice."

Rose sighed.  Boromir seemed to have built up energy from sleeping
through the morning.  He began pacing back and forth, stroking his
beard, a kind of bounding energy in every step.

"I, uh," Rose said, tracking him back and forth with her eyes.  "I
double-checked it.  Alexandria did, too."

It had taken the other girl entirely too long, in Rose's opinion.
They were mere hours from twilight now.  But she supposed she couldn't
begrudge a little caution.

"That's good enough for me," Boromir said.  "Who wants to do the
honors?"

Everyone's gaze turned to Alexandria, except for Esper, who turned her
head very intently toward an empty patch of wall.  The blonde girl
brushed her hair back, suppressing a smile.  "I'd be happy to," she
said, turning toward the faces on the wall.

Rose took a deep breath, reaching for her riverstone.  If they'd
gotten it wrong, they'd have to guess, and fully half the time they
might...die?  It didn't feel real.  She suddenly wasn't so annoyed
that Alexandria had taken her time making sure of their answer.

Alexandria walked up to the face furthest to the left, leaning close
to its carved ear, and spoke to it without a hint of fear on her face.
