---
layout: crescat
title: 1.05 Words
---

Rose stood on her tiptoes, trying to peer over Alexandria's shoulder
at the faces carved in the wall.  She had her notebook out, charcoal
poised.  She didn't want to miss a second.

Alexandria cleared her throat, quietly, and leaned forward until her
face was barely a foot from the first carving.  "If I were to ask
you," she said with perfect enunciation, "whether the leftmost passage
leads to the tower, would you answer Da?"

There was no reaction.  Alexandria leaned back, then forward, bouncing
on the balls of her feet.  She clasped and unclasped her hands.  Rose
was still trying to work her out, but it was possible the other girl
wasn't as calm as she seemed.

There was a crackling noise, like a fresh log in a fire, and
Alexandria jumped a little.  A voice came from the carving she'd
spoken to, sounding low and just-so-subtly inhuman, as if it was
muffled and tinged with iron.  "Da," the voice said.

Nothing had moved, nothing had shifted.  Rose felt a chill go down her
spine.  It sounded like the noise had come from the metal circle where
the carving's mouth should be, but it was hard to tell for sure.

Alexandria drew herself up, nodding.  Rose scribbled the answer down
in her notebook, not that she expected to forget.  After a moment's
thought, she wrote down everything else she could remember -- the
crackling, the strange tone of voice, the delay.  There was no telling
what would be important.

She almost smacked herself in the head.  Might have, if she hadn't had
her hands full.  Stupid, stupid, stupid.  She should've written down
everything she remembered about the first puzzle, too, and the one-way
trap, as soon as there was daylight to work with.  She had to stop
herself from doing it right then.  There would be time for that in a
second.  Right now she had to watch.

Rose looked up from the page to see Alexandria already in front of the
second face.  She watched intently, charcoal hovering over the page.
The next two questions went the same as the first: question, short
pause, crackle.  The second face answered "Ba", and the third "Da".

It seemed kind of...anticlimactic?  Rose wasn't sure what she'd been
expecting, but she'd thought her first brush with tower magic would be
a little less drab.

Alexandria stepped back, exhaling with a smile as the tension left her
frame.  "I guess it's the left path?"

"Mmmm," Dexter responded.  Rose turned to look at him.  He was chewing
on his finger again, looking far away.  "Seems that way.  We should
move, there are only a few hours of light left."

"Maybe we should spend another night here and leave in the morning?"
Alexandria asked.

"No, the boy is right," Borodin's booming voice cut in.  "We should
make haste.  At worst we return here when it's too dark to continue."

"Boy?" Dexter asked, sounding more amused than affronted.

"What if there's another one-way gate?" Robin asked.

Dexter ignored him.  "How old are you, exactly?" he said to Borodin.

Borodin puffed himself up.  "Seventeen."

"We're the same age then.  In fact--"

"I think we should stay another night," Alexandria spoke over him.
"It would be bad to get stuck somewhere dangerous in the dark."

"It's all the same to me, of course," Esper added, lifting a hand to
her mouth as if to hide a smile.  "But one thing to consider..."

Rose turn away from them and walked back to the corner where she'd
stored her bag, rolling her eyes once the others couldn't see her
face.  She knew better than to try and get a word in edgewise, now.
Instead, she sat among her things and began to record every detail she
could remember about the mountain.

She wrote down the two puzzles, the first as best she could remember,
the second word for word.  She recorded the path they'd taken, the
layout of the room they were in, and finally started listing all the
strange elements of tower craftsmanship: the materials, the precise
tolerances, the odd cleanliness.

When she finished, she lifted her head to see the others still
arguing.  She opened her bag, sorting through her things.  She had
another week of pemmican -- no, four days, if she and Alexandria kept
sharing with Robin.  She wouldn't *starve* after that, but she
wouldn't be at her best, either.

They had maybe three hours of light left?  Three hours was a long
time.  They didn't know how much of their journey remained, and so far
they'd only been prevented from retreating by an obvious trap.

Besides, her curiosity would kill her, now that she knew what path to
take.  She stood up, gathering her things, and walked to the fountain.
She drank from it until her stomach felt bloated, then refilled her
waterskin -- there was no telling when they'd find clean water again.

She fixed her cloak, setting the bag at her side, and without even
reaching for her iron, she marched past the others and straight down
the lefthand tunnel.

"Rose!" Alexandria's voice called after her.  "Where are you going?"

"I suppose that settles it, then," Borodin said in a good-natured
voice.  "Three to two, Esper abstaining.  Let's get going."

The passageway was much the same as the one they'd entered through,
long and smooth with a gentle grade.  Rose could see a turn up ahead.

"Wait!"  Alexandria yelled at her back.  "Rose, wait a minute, we
should at least all go together.  We need to gather our things."

Rose reached the turn and took it, listening to the hubbub behind grow
muffled.  She could still hear voices arguing, punctuated by Dexter's
wild laugh.

Now that they couldn't see her, she lay down her bag and sat against
the wall.  They'd come, now, but she didn't want to get *too* far
ahead.  Alexandria was right, after all.

---

"You lot are impossible," Alexandria seethed as they made their way
forward together.  "It's like herding cats."

"Ooh," Esper broke in.  "Is that an idiom?  I hadn't heard that one
before.  Or is cat herding an actual endeavor where you're from?"

Alexandria sighed.  "It's an idiom."

The path twisted until they'd left the rest area's light far behind
them, and they were making their way forward in almost perfect
darkness.  Rose closed her eyes, and she couldn't tell any difference.

She trailed her hand along the wall, thinking as she walked.  She was
still trying to figure out how the group fit together.  People were
complicated, but ultimately comprehensible, like a particularly large
and messy puzzle.

It was a little dehumanizing, but she'd gotten a lot better at
interacting with strangers when she'd started to think of them that
way.  And so she asked herself, the same as she had with the three
sisters: what was the simplest problem she didn't know the answer to?

Alexandria and Borodin she had a grasp on.  She wouldn't say she'd
*solved* them, but she understood the shape of things.

Robin might have been a simple problem for someone else, but he didn't
seem to want to talk to her.  No angle of attack.

Dexter was...well, plausible, but she suspected he was less than
simple.  Or more than simple, maybe that was more apt.  And he'd
promised to tell her anything she wanted to know when they reached the
tower.

That left Esper.  The girl was strange, but chatty, and seemed
friendly enough.  A perfect morsel of the larger puzzle to worry at.
In theory.

If only she could think of something to *say*...

Esper began humming to herself, loudly and off-tune.

---

There was a noise up ahead, a thump followed by muffled swearing.
Rose stopped immediately, heart speeding up a little, straining her
eyes to try and see through the pitch black.  Robin bumped into her
from behind with a soft "oof", a second too slow.

"What happened?" she asked, her voice just barely higher pitched.

"Hah!"  Borodin called back from the front, alongside a sound of
movement.  "Nothing to worry about.  I found us a staircase."

Rose breathed out in relief.  She moved forward slowly, feeling past
the others until she reached Borodin.  The hallway did in fact turn
into a staircase, and the large boy had already hauled himself
upward.  "Excellent!" he said.  "We'll make better time this way."

Robin cursed as he came up besider her and bumped his shins.  The
stairs were *tall*, maybe a foot and a half each.  "How am I supposed
to get my trunk up these?" he asked.

"That sounds like your problem!" Borodin's voice replied, echoing
strangely from above them.  "How about that, it's a spiral!"

"Borodin!" Alexandria called from beside Rose.  She hadn't started up
the stairs herself.  "Get back here!  We'll go faster if you help
Robin with his trunk."

Borodin muttered good-naturedly under his breath as he made his way
back down.  Rose moved back a ways while they fumbled around in the
dark, getting it sorted out.

It took some doing, but they managed to get everyone moving up the
stairs.  Robin's trunk went *thunk* on every step as they dragged it
up, punctuating just how slow their progress was.

Rose trailed her hand along the wall again as they walked, steadying
herself and--wait.  What was that?

"Hold on!" she said.  "Could we go back a bit?"

"Absolutely not," Robin heaved out between gasping breaths.

"It's important.  I think I felt something on the wall."

"What?"

"I think I felt something on the wall.  It's always been perfectly
smooth until now."

"Back down, everyone!" Alexandria said.

The group relucantantly clomped down a few steps, and Rose ran her
fingers the wall, trying to find it again.  There it was.  She felt
around the edges of the shape.  It was a small groove in the wall,
long but no more than an fingertip across.  It curved into some kind
of shape -- she closed her eyes trying to visualize it.  Like a
circle, but missing the lower right bit, and with a horizontal line
through the middle of it that just reached the edges.

Oh.

"I think it's a letter!" she said.

"What?"

"It's a small groove in the shape of an e!" she said.  "I think it's
another puzzle.  We should go back down, there might be others that we
missed!"

"That will slow us down too much," Alexandria cut in quickly before
anyone could complain.  "Let's send one or two of us down to figure out
what it says and keep moving upward with our luggage."

"You mean this one trunk?" Borodin asked.

Robin made a noise somewhere between a scoff and a growl.

"Some of our bags are heavy, too." Alexandria said in a mellow tone.
"The point is we should keep moving them upward."

"I can do it!" Esper's voice rose from the back, light and sing-song.
"I have an excellent memory."

"I'll go with her!" Rose said quickly, spotting an opportunity.  "I,
uh...my bag is light," she said lamely.  Nobody called her on it,
though.

---

"A straight line," Rose said.  "Either a lower-case l or a capital I."

"Hmm," Esper replied.  "A pox on whoever created this ambiguous
script.  Let's continue, the next few should place it in context."

The two of them had found the letters they'd missed at the bottom of
the stairs, making their way upward quickly, and by now had passed the
rest of the group.

"Er, OK," Rose said.  "Isn't that a little harsh?"

"Not at all.  Most underestimate the weight of small decisions.  I'm
not familiar with this script, but the letters we've encountered are
exactly identical.  Someone standardized on this abomination, most
likely centuries ago.  Consider all the confusions, all the errors and
lost time, caused by thousands or tens of thousands or *hundreds* of
thousands using this script over a hundred years.  Most likely, our
anonymous script writer is responsible for decades of lost time.  If
you steal decades of time from a single soul, we call it murder.  Is
it so much better if the wrong is spread thin?"

Rose choked out a laugh, wondering if it was a joke.  "You can't
believe that.  Anyone who did anything important would be as bad as a
murderer, unless they'd done it perfectly."

Esper hmmed to herself.  "Perhaps.  I suppose I *don't* believe that
wrongs can be summed so neatly, not in truth.  But what sort of
diseased mind, tasked with standardizing fifty two shapes, decides to
make two of them so similar?  It is the difference between a mistake
and negligence.  Like leaving sharp knives in a child's crib.  For all
we know this degenerate also decided that a vertical line would
suffice for the numeral 1.  It makes me sick."

Rose didn't know what to say to that.  Esper seemed to have said her
piece, and began to hum happily as they made their way toward the next
letter.

---

Rose's foot reached for the next stair -- and missed, coming down with
a jerk on flat ground.  They must have finally reached the top.  She
exhaled a little.

"We're at the top of the stairs!" she called backward, so Esper
wouldn't be surprised.

"Wonderful!  Is that all the letters, then?"

"Let me check."

Rose felt along the wall a little further.  The stairs emered into
what felt like a small alcove, straight and shallow.  There were
cracks on the wall at the end, so fine she thought she might be
imagining them -- like the edges of the door at the entrance to the
mountain, she realized.

"No letters!  But I think there's a door."

"Mhmm!"

Rose ran her hands lightly over the surface of the door, searching for
any break in the smooth stone.  Right in the center, her fingertips
caught the edge of a raised button.  She traced it carefully, making
sure not to push it even as she tested the tension.  There was another
beyond it, and another, forming a perfect row of twenty six.

God she wished she could see.

She could hear, though.  Esper stood a few feet behind her, clothing
rustling quietly in the black void.  The other girl was breathing
evenly, if a little heavily from the climb, apparently content to let
Rose explore their surroundings.  When her heart slowed, they might be
able to hear the distant thumps from down the stairwell.

Rose checked the rest of the door, just to be sure, and then the other
wall, but there was nothing to be found.  "Yeah, I think it's a door,"
she said, breaking the silence.  "There's twenty-six buttons in the
middle.  Do you rememember all the letters?"

"Mhmm," Esper said, sounding a touch morose.  "I do.  They spell
riddles, of a sort.  Three of them."

"Of a sort?"

"*Tower* riddles, if they even deserve the name.  And to think I was
almost excited.  I do so love riddles..."

Rose tucked that little nugget away for later.  "What were they?"

Esper cleared her throat.

"What starts wars, ends law, and is there when you look in the
mirror?"

"What lies alone between here and there, comes after this and before
that?"

"Forward I'm heavy, backwards I'm not."

Rose reached into cloak, searching for her driftwood, but Esper
continued talking.  "I wouldn't waste any time on them, however.
There's no beauty to be found in tower riddles, only tricks.  I
already know how to open the door."

Rose paused, fingers poised at the hem of an inner pocket.  "Oh?" she
asked.  "Of course," Esper replied.  "Shall we wait for the others, or
press on?"

"What do you think?" Rose asked.

Esper hmmed, the noise rising and falling musically in pitch.  "That's
not for me to say, I think.  I am but a humble observer.  To act is
not in my blood."

"Oh," Rose replied.  That seemed a little sad.  "Why is that?"

"It simply is.  Hm, no, I suppose that doesn't answer your question.
But I really do prefer not to focus on myself so much.  Now, what is
it you wish to do?"

"You say you know the answer?"

"Almost certainly."

Rose could feel the pressure to move on, see what was next, like a
physical force buffeting her toward the door.  It was so strong it
muffled even her mild disappointment that she hadn't contributed to
the puzzle.  But she forced herself to think it through.

"We wait for Alexandria," she said finally.  "It isn't worth risking a
mistake."  Plus, Alexandria was already mad at her for running ahead.
She didn't want to let that anger put down roots.

"Mmmm," Esper said noncommittally.  "Admirable restraint.  What shall
we do to pass the time?"

"You said you like riddles?"

"I *adore* them."

"What's your favorite riddle, then?"

Esper giggled, the sound even and melodious.  "You misunderstand the
nature of riddles.  No riddle is good or bad on its own.  Only in
relation to oneself.  It must make sense in your language, just to
begin with.  And it must make reference only to those things you know
and understand, without being too obvious.  The very best riddles seem
impossible to solve, and obvious once you know the answer.  And so the
very best riddles are different for everyone."

That was...an interesting perspective.  Rose's mother had always told
her the opposite.  That there were puzzles, riddles, mysteries out in
the world, all of them beautiful, and that the goal of an education
was to turn yourself into the sort of person who could appreciate
them.

"But what's *your* favorite riddle?" Rose pressed back.  "Maybe, your
favorite riddle in my language?  The one that was best for you?"

"Hm.  Nobody has asked me a question like that in quite some time.
Let me think.  Ah, yes.  This one was told to my father by a learned
merchant from the western polities who came to court.  'First I was
grown, long and brown.  Then I was driven, into the ground.  Then I
was held inside myself.  Finally, I found I was nothing but wealth.'
You can work it over, if you want, but I don't think it was meant for
you."

"What's the answer?"  Rose wasn't usually one to let a puzzle slip by
her, but the others would crest the stairs eventually.  Right now she
was far more interested in the puzzle of Esper herself.

"The answer is 'stock'!  The gentleman was right to share it with my
father.  It's a riddle a thousand years in the making, you see, and
very attractive to a linguist.  Long ago, when the western tongue was
first settling, the word 'stick' morphed into the word 'stock'.  It
meant a long thick piece of wood, like a post or the trunk of a tree.
You can still see this usage in words like 'stocky' or 'stocking',
meaning long, straight, and thick.  And in wooden stockades, or the
stocks men are hanged from in these lands.

"These wooden stocks were used to build enclosures, stockyards, to
hold physical goods.  The western polities are enamoured of metonymy,
and so they began to refer to the contents of these stockyard as a
stock of goods.  This is why we say a store has something in stock,
for example.

"Finally, the word somehow came to mean ownership in a venture.  I'm
unclear on how this transformation occured, although we have theories.
To the merchant visiting my father, this is all that stocks were
anymore.  A measure of the wealth contained in his various holdings.
He cared not for physical goods, or the organizational complexities of
the people involved.  Only how much of the wealth belonged to him.

"So it was a very private riddle.  A riddle that said as much about
the men sharing it -- a merchant and a linguist -- as about the
world.  A riddle with a depth and richness of meaning, a history of
linguistic and economic development, and an unsolved question for my
father to think on.  He loved that riddle, and has told me the story
at least a dozen times."

It didn't slip past Rose that Esper had shared her *father's* favorite
riddle, not her own.  But it was something.  Rose smiled.

She felt like she should reciprocate somehow.  That was how people
built rapport, right?  Reciprocation?  She reached into her cloak for
her driftwood, nestling it in the nuckle of her right hand.  Aha!

"Pemmican," she said.  "You commented on it before, that it was a
strange word?"

"Mmmm," Esper said.

"Legend says we learned the recipe for pemmican from the old folk.
The people who lived here before the tower.  One of their customs was
a yearly journey north, and Pemmican allowed them to survive it.
Maybe it's their word."

"Is that so?" Esper asked, an edge of eagerness in her voice.  "That
would explain it.  The language of your old folk has been lost for a
long time.  Can you think of anything else your tongue might have
borrowed?"

"Um...some animals, maybe?  Ones that were native to here, or to the
north?  I think Caribou were important to them."

"Any words you have two of, that sound very different?  Any religious
symbols they used that survived?"

"Er...I don't know much about their religion.  They built totems, I
think?  I'm sorry, I really don't know."

There was a beat of silence, as if Esper was waiting for her to say
more.

"That's fine then," Esper said happily.  "Something to look into, I
suppose.  Thank you."

Rose opened her mouth to reply, but Esper began humming, slightly less
off-tune than before.  Rose shrugged.  She could hear the others
nearing the top of the stairs, anyway.  She turned her mind to the
riddles they'd found on the walls.  Esper might not think they were
interesting, but Rose couldn't resist spending at least a little time
worrying them over.

---

"What starts wars, ends law, and is there when you look in the
mirror?"

"What lies alone between here and there, comes after this and before
that?"

"Forward I'm heavy, backwards I'm not."
