---
layout: crescat
title: 1.06 Split
---

"W, and, ton." Esper said.

Rose couldn't see the other's faces, but she heard an uncomfortable
rustling.  Her mind's eye painted shifting feet, glances left and
right in the dark.

"How's that?" Alexandria asked.

"W, and, ton.  They're tower riddles.  More syntax than semantics."

"Ah," Dexter's voice broke in.  "I see it.  Clever.  And once you
see one, the others fall quickly."

Esper sniffed.  "Clever after a fashion, I suppose."

"I thought the whole point of a riddle was that the answer seems
obvious, once you know it." Alexandria said.  "I don't get how W
starts wars, ends...oh.  Wait, no, I see it.  And ton backwards..."

Boromir swore under his breath a moment later.  Rose smiled, feeling
small dimples form in her cheeks.

"I think we just push the buttons on the wall, in that order," Rose
said.  "Should be straightforward.  We lucked out having Esper with us
I guess."

"You're too kind," the other girl said, her voice pitched
deferentially.  "It is pleasing to know I am not a burden.
Alexandria, I suppose you should do the honors again?"

Rose heard the other girl's footsteps approach the wall.  She strained
her ears to detect the rasp of fingers over stone, but Alexandria's
touch was too quiet.  "First letter is the fourth from the right?"
Alexandria asked the room.

"Yes," Rose and Boromir said in tandem, his deep voice harmonizing
pleasantly with hers.  She heard him cough into his hand.  It was hard
to read social cues by sound alone.  Maybe that was part of why Esper
acted the way she did?

Alexandria input the rest of the letters.  Rose heard the door in
front of them make a whispering, slidey sound.  Light seeped into the
alcove they were standing in, enough to see the world in front of her,
but not enough to blind her eyes even after hours in darkness.

Rose felt her eyebrows climb.  They'd taken hours to get here, and it
must be well past sundown by now.  The light in front of them was
steady, not the sort cast by a candle or a torch.  It was also
strangely cold, like moonlight but brighter, or like sunlight
reflected off snow.

She pushed forward, but Boromir caught her shoulder.  "Together, yes?"
Rose let steer her forward together with the group.  They walked
through the door together, matching Robin's slow pace as he rolled his
heavy trunk along.

Through the door was a short hallway, emerging into a circular room
with a high ceiling.  The light came from perfectly square panels
above them, clearly magical.  They shone with no apparent source of
fuel, shedding that cold white light without so much as a flicker.
Rose felt her breath escape slowly as she stared upward.

Once again, she found herself reaching for a fifth secret treasure she
didn't have, something suited to these moments.

A loud caw brought her attention down to the middle of the room.
Below the lights was a pedestal, holding a cage of brass.  Inside the
cage was a raven, or what looked almost like a raven, except that the
shoulders of its wings were a bold red.

The bird cawed again, staring at them, and shuffled its feet.

"We're close," Dexter said beside her.  Rose turned to see him staring
at the bird.  He glanced back at her out of the corner of his eye.
"The redwing has no food or water.  It was put here recently."

"It might be kept alive by magic," Rose said.  Dexter scoffed, turning
away from her.  She rubbed her arm, turning away as well.

"It doesn't matter," Alexandria said.  "I don't see another exit.
What are we trying to do here?"

"A CHOICE!" the bird squawked out, the sound a strained imitation of
human speech.  Rose jumped, whipping her head toward it.  Boromir was
still holding her shoulder, and she pressed behind him a little,
interposing his bulk between her and the bird.

"What devilry..." Boromir spluttered, taking a step back that carried
Rose along with him.

Robin laughed, slightly nasally.  "You've never seen a talking bird?"
he asked.

"Of course not!"  Boromir stopped retreating, crossing his arms.  Rose
glanced up and saw a tinge of red in his cheeks, poking out above his
enormous beard.

"I've never seen a bird at all," Esper commented lightly.  "But this
doesn't sound like a parrot to me.  Perhaps a crow?"

"What's a parrot?" Rose asked, peeking past Boromir's arm.

"It doesn't matter," Dexter replied.  "This is a tower raven.  They've
been bred for centuries.  Clever, good memories, easily trained.
Capable of mimicking human speech, after a fashion.  The tower uses
them to send missives to the outside world."

"Why not just tie a note to their leg, like normal people?" Boromir
muttered.  "Can't be blamed for not expecting a talking bird..."  Rose
gave his arm a squeeze.

"A CHOICE!" the bird squawked again, jumping up and rattling its cage.

"What choice?" Alexandria asked, walking toward it.

"A CHOICE!  UP, OR DOWN!"  the bird squawked.  "A CHOICE MADE IN
SECRET!"

Alexandria drew to a stop before the bird.  She reached out a hand and
the bird hopped forward, eyeing her through the bars of the cage.

"I wouldn't," Dexter said mildly.  "Easily trained doesn't mean
docile."

Alexandria ignored him, poking her finger through the cage and
stroking the side of the raven's head.  The bird eyed her
suspiciously, but let her stroke it.

"Up or down?" Alexandria asked it in a soothing voice.

"UP OR DOWN!  A CHOICE!  IF ALL CHOOSE UP, A SINGLE TRIAL BARS YOUR
WAY ABOVE!  DIRE!  A DIRE TRIAL!  IF ALL CHOOSE DOWN, YOUR FATE BELOW
IS DEATH!  DEATH!  A CHOICE!"

The bird twitched its head, looking back and forth between them.

"IF SOME CHOOSE UP, AND OTHERS DOWN, A FORKING OF THE PATH!  TWO
TRIALS FOR THOSE ABOVE!  TWO!  NONE FOR THOSE BELOW, THE WAY IS CLEAR!
A CHOICE!  A CHOICE!"

The bird twitched its head again, its eyes locking on to Rose.  She
stared back, feeling through her cloak.  She wasn't quite sure what
object was appropriate for this sort of situation.  Maybe wood, for a
clever solution, or stone, to think through it clearly, or...

Boromir lauhed, and she could feel the booming noise shaking his
frame.  She let go of his arm and stepped away, staring at him.

"Finally," Boromir said, drawing himself up to his full height.  "I
was worried I wouldn't get to be useful."

"A sensible worry," Dexter drawled.

Boromir ignored him, continuing.  "I know this dilemma!  A band of
honorable men must all choose up; it is known.  But a dishonorable
cur," and here he shot Dexter a long look, "might choose down, knowing
this, and so ensure his own survival!"

"Very peceptive," Dexter replied.  "But you said something about being
useful?"

Boromir unslung his backpack, setting it on the ground and rifling
through it.  "Do you know the story of the knotted gourd?"

"Boromir," Alexandria broke in.  "It's late, and we're all tired.
Maybe it isn't the best moment for stories?"

"A fine point!"  Boromir stood up from his bag, a sheathed dagger in
his meaty hand.  "In any case, the moral of the story is that
sometimes all you need to solve a twisty problem, is a good length of
steel."

Rose took a step back, glancing around her.  Robin had retreated
almost to the wall.  Alexandria had her arms crossed, looking
unamused.  Esper had wandered off to a corner of the room, running her
hands over the wall.  And Dexter was staring at Boromir, eyes
narrowed, first knuckle of his pointer finger wedged firmly in his
teeth.

Rose took another step back.

"An Oath!"  Boromir bellowed at the top of his lungs.  He drew the
dagger and traced it lightly across the palm of his hand, producing a
tiny trickle of blood.  He raised that hand in the air, squeezing it
tight until blood began to drip slowly down his arm and into the cuff
of his shirt.

"Should any of you betray us, we will triumph over the two trials
above.  And when we meet again, at the foot of the tower, I will find
you, and I will drive a foot of steel through your belly."

"You'd be killed," Dexter commented, narrow eyes still fixed on
Boromir.  "For murdering a student of the tower."

Boromir drew himself up, eyes shining.  "Aye, I would.  But a man of
the mountain is as good as his word.  And because I would die for my
oath, I will not be called on to fulfill it.  That is the power of
honor."

Alexandria sighed.  "He will, too," she said, sounding resigned.
"Just in case anyone is wondering."

"Of course you'd say that," Dexter replied.  "It costs you nothing.  A
two-part act, is it?  The wild-eyed mountain man and his
oh-so-reasonable sister?"

"You're, um," Rose said, her voice coming out as a squeak.  "Boromir.
You're still bleeding."

Boromir looked at his hand, which was now dripping rather a lot of
blood onto the ground.  "That I am.  "Does anyone have bandages?"

Alexandria sighed again, heavier, and began rummaging through her
pack.  "You'll probably get an infection," she muttered.  "And I'll
have to amputate the hand."

"Poppycock!  My blade is always clean, you know that."

Rose glanced back at Dexter, but her eyes were drawn to Robin behind
him.  The smaller boy was staring at Boromir as well, his back against
the wall, a strange look twisting his face.

Robin noticed her looking and sneered, turning his face away.  Rose
looked down at her shoes.  She'd been staring, hadn't she?

"A CHOICE!" the crow squawked at them.  "WHISPER TO ME!  A CHOICE!"

Rose looked up again.  Alexandria had tied her long hair back with a
length of leather cord, and was standing next to Boromir, bandages in
hand.  "I, um," Rose said.  "I have some clean water, if you want."

Alexandria looked up at her, a mix of exasperation and thanks on her
face.  "That would be wonderful, Rose," she said.

Rose walked over, rummaging for her waterskin.  The scene seemed
eerie, unreal, in the low cold light.  It washed out the warm colors
of people's skin, making the bright red of Boromir's cut stand out
even sharper.  She handed over the water to Alexandria, who took it
without a word, splashing it onto Boromir's palm until the blood ran
thin.  "Wish I hadn't used up the last of our soap on the road," she
mumbled good naturedly as she began to wrap up the hand in a strip of
clean white cloth.

When his hand was clean and bandaged, Boromir flexed it, shooting
Alexandria and Rose a beaming smile.  He seemed very alive, in that
moment, and Rose smiled back.

"Well," he said, flexing his hand again without even a wince.  "Let's
get on with it.  Everyone whisper up to the bird!"

"You really seem to be under the delusion that you're in charge,"
Dexter said, voice deceptively mild.  "I'm not terribly happy about
that."

"A pity, seeing as how you've been so jolly until now."

"Cutting.  Truly."

Alexandria stood up, placing herself between the two of them.  "It's
late," she said.  "Like I said before.  I don't know how late, but I
know I'm falling asleep on my feet.  Let's rest here.  We can make
our choice in the morning."

"A CHOICE!" the raven chimed in.

---

Rose sat with her notebook, alone with the raven under cold white
lights.  The others had returned to the top of the stairs, to sleep in
the darkness.  She was tired too; it was getting late enough she could
feel it like a physical weight pressing her eyelids shut.  But she had
things to do.

She had to record everything that had happened.  The riddles, the
personal interactions, everything.  How had she not thought to write
down notes on her companions before?  She'd been too caught up with
their journey, she'd gotten sloppy.

After that, she had to talk to the raven.  Maybe it had more clues to
give, intentionally or not.  Maybe there was a secret to be found.

And after *that*, she had to--

She saw movement above her notebook, and raised her eyes to see Dexter
stepping into the room.  He was walking carefully, putting his toes
and the ball of his foot down before the heel, almost silent.  He
padded over to her and sat down, smiling rakishly from under his
matted hair.  She wasn't sure he'd smiled at her like that before.

"Hey," he whispered, very quietly.

"Hey," she whispered back, not sure why they were being quiet.  He was
sitting a little close to her, and she resisted the oddly
contradictory urges to scoot away and to lean toward him.

Dexter's eyes flickered to the entryway.  His face looked calm and
relaxed, but there was tension in his shoulders.

"Couldn't sleep again?" she asked quietly.

He shrugged.  "Always," he replied.  "But that's not why I'm here.
Tell me, have you seen Boromir's mistake yet?"

Rose froze, mind ratcheting back to the earlier discussion, looking it
over quickly.  Was there a mistake?  If so--

"No matter," Dexter continued smoothly.  "He misunderstood the
problem.  He perceived only the difficulty of ensuring that nobody
says down after he says up.  To someone with my -- let's call them
life experiences -- the problem looks very different.  The difficulty,
which he promptly eliminated, lies in ensuring at least one person
says up after I say down.  Hypothetically speaking, of course."

Rose thought about it.  It made sense, hypothetically speaking.  If
you wanted to defect, your biggest problem was making sure at least
one person said "up".  Otherwise you'd die.

"He'll kill you," Rose whispered, eyes darting up to the entryway like
a delayed echo of Dexter's.

"He might," Dexter replied quietly.  "But to kill me, he'd have to
pass two difficult trials.  I'm sure the tower saved the hardest
challenges for last.  It's how they think.  Now, hypothetically
speaking again, if everyone except Boromir said 'down', how likely do
you think he is to survive those two trials on his own?  How likely is
he to kill me after making it out, when I have a head start?  Multiply
those two chances together, and is it really a higher chance of death
than our chance of failing the final trial?"

Rose felt an ugly feeling creeping up her spine.  "A CHOICE!" the
raven squawked, making her jump.  She glanced at the entryway again,
but didn't hear anyone stirring.  The bird had been making noise for
hours, nobody would come to check it.  Probably.

Why was she nervous about someone coming?  She wasn't doing anything
she shouldn't be.  Or was she?  Should she stop?  Rose reached into
her cloak, feeling for stone, or iron, or something.

"Hypothetically," she whispered back.  "You'd have to convince
people.  Are you sure we should be--"

"I can convince Robin," Dexter interrupted her.  "Esper too, maybe.
She's sharper than she lets on, and she won't think highly of her
chances up there with just the three of them.  Alexandria's probably a
lost cause."

Rose's fingers closed on her lump of stone.  She took a deep breath.
It was a bit of a curious problem.  At first glance, it was a simple
coordination issue.  How do you get everyone to say up?

But that was approaching it from the perspective of someone trying to
cooperate.  From Dexter's selfish perspective -- er, his
*hypothetical* selfish perspective -- the problem looked very
different.

And, she realized, there was a third perspective.  One she should have
seen right away.  It was a stupid perspective, maybe.  But now that
she'd seen it, she didn't think she could turn away.  She swallowed,
gripping her stone a little tighter.

"There is...there's a third option," she said finally

Dexter cocked an eyebrow.

Rose took a deep breath.  "I'll say up.  The rest of you will say
down.  Simple."

Dexter stared at her with disbelief on his face, and she felt her
shoulders hunch in protectively.  Had she said something stupid?  She
ran through the raven's words again in her head.

"What." he said flatly, not even a question.

"You, um, you said the last puzzle will be the hardest.  We might not
be able to solve it.  I'm not trying to say you're stupid or anything,
but that's just reality.  Is it really better for six people to risk
death once, than for one person to risk death twice?"

"I see." Dexter looked away from her, his eyes flicking up and to the
left as he frowned.  "Curious," he said in a far away voice.  "I
suppose I hadn't thought of that.  Quite curious."

"It's like you said," Rose replied, relaxing her shoulders.  "About
your life experiences?"

"How do you mean?"

"It's what my mother would have done."

Dexter brought his eyes down to stare at her.  His gaze was intense,
and her own eyes flickered down to the ground after a moment.  "It's
foolish," he said, still in that far away voice.  "But I'd be more the
fool to tell you no."

He stood, abruptly, brushing his pant legs.  "I suppose my
hypothetical is irrelevant, if those are in fact your life
experiences.  Let's talk more in the morning."

Rose brought her gaze up to stare at his back as he walked away.  She
released her riverstone and pulled her cloak tighter around herself,
once she was alone again.  Couldn't he have stayed?  It wasn't like he
was going to sleep now, anyway.

She picked up her notebook again, feeling the heaviness settle back
into her eyes now that Dexter was gone.

---

"Absolutely not."  Boromir crossed his arms, raising his chin.  Rose
looked down, scuffing the ground with her shoe.  What could she say to
convince him?

"She isn't wrong, Boromir," Alexandria said diplomatically.  She laid
a hand on his arm, which he shrugged off.

"To send her up alone would be cowardice.  Besides which, I swore an
*oath*, Alex.  It's done."

"A CHOICE!" the raven cawed.  Rose wasn't sure when the damned thing
slept, but it had been waiting for them in the morning when they'd
gathered in the room with the cold square lights.  She realized she
had absolutely no idea what time of day it was.  The thought was a
little unsettling.

"A choice, exactly," Boromir said.  "I made my choice."

"You aim to make the choice for all of us," Dexter replied.  Rose
raised her eyes and saw him leaning on the wall, hair falling over his
eyes.  Robin sat next to him, on his trunk, nodding emphatically.

"It isn't fair," he chimed in.

"And it's fair to send Rose to brave these trials for us?
Preposterous!  You don't care for fairness; you're afraid.  You're a
terrified, squirming--"

"Bormir," Alexandria interrupted him gently.  She wrapped herself
around his arm, and after a brief shake failed to dislodge her,
Boromir let her hang on.  "Rose gets to make a choice, too.  This is
what she wants."

"Even you, dearest sister?"  Boromir sounded sad more than angry.
"Are you so easily deceived?"  Boromir raised his free arm and
brandished a meaty finger at Dexter.  "This Cur!" he said, voice
rising.  "Has goaded the poor girl into it."  Dexter tried and failed
to suppress a smirk, brushing tangled hair out of eyes as he and
Boromir locked stares.

Rose returned her eyes to the ground.  She noticed her fingers were
fidgeting, feeling on their own through the dark recesses of her
cloak.  She guided them to her iron, preparing to join the argument.

"Do you deny it?" Boromir asked.

Dexter scoffed.  "We spoke a bit, last night, about the choice.  It
was her idea."

"Of course it was."  Boromir said, as if he'd settled everything.

Rose took a deep breath.  "I want to do it," she said quietly.

Boromir turned to her, a look she couldn't quite place on his face.
"Rose of Summervale," he said in a formal tone of voice.  "Your offer
is selfless, truly.  But you do not need to sacrifice yourself for
us.  We--"

"I'm not," Rose said loudly, interrupting him.  Boromir closed his
mouth, bushy blone eyebrows rising.  Had she raised her voice a little
too much?  It was so hard to get a word in.

"I'm not," she said again more quietly.  "I'm not sacrificing myself.
If I'm going to die in here," -- and as she said it her stomach
lurched, the possibility of her death seeming realer as she spoke of
it -- "then I gain nothing from the five of you dying with me.  But I
don't intend to die.  So I'm not sacrificing myself."  She tightened
her grip on the iron until she could feel the shape of it pressed into
her skin.

"Your chances are better with all of us." Boromir replied.

"All the rest of our chances are better if it's just her," Robin's
voice piped up from the wall.

"Why not go yourself then, boy?" Boromir replied, not even turning to
look at him.  "The rest of our chances would be just as good."

Rose shook her head.  "It should be me.  I have the best chance."

Dexter laughed, his voice surprisingly high-pitched.  It had a bit of
the wildness she'd heard in his laugh before, in that dark hallway,
but this was less crazed and more gleeful.

"You hear that, Boromir?  I'm not sure you quite have the measure of
our Rose, just yet."

Our Rose, he'd said.  It gave her a warm, familiar feeling in her
chest.  Her father -- she pushed the thought from her mind.  This
wasn't the time.

Boromir opened his mouth, but Alexandria broke in before he could
talk.  "Do you remember what gran used to say, Boromir, about kindness
freely given?  When someone hands you a gift, you don't throw it on
the ground."

Boromir closed his mouth, working his jaw like he was chewing.  "It
doesn't matter," he said finally.  "I gave my oath.  That's the end of
it."

Esper cleared her throat, loudly and distinctly.  Rose turned to look
at her, and saw the blind girl with her back turned toward the group,
head raised.  She'd forgotten the other girl was there.

"Could you clarify a point of history for me, Boromir?" she asked.

"Of course..." Boromir replied, his voice a little hesitant.

"Near the end of the Age of the Mountain Kings, Prince Adrah gave his
oath that he would see his cousin's head removed from his shoulders.
Yet that very cousin died on the road a month later, and he never
searched for the body to behead, nor was he dishonored.  Why is that?"

Boromir sniffed.  "Any reasonable man would understand his meaning.
My people put little stock in legalistic bickering.  His cousin was
dead, his oath void."

"I see.  But a mere decade after that, when he had taken the throne
and brought war to the Gales, his own son swore to sack their capital.
Yet when the Gales sued for peace--"

"Yes, yes, his son recanted.  King Adrah released him from his oath,
that peace might be had.  This is a waste of time!  State your point
plainly, woman."

Esper made a hmming noise, turning to face them.  "I have no point.
Merely questions, which you have answered; and thank you for your
kindness."

Boromir and Dexter snorted, almost in synchrony.  They turned to look
at each other.

"Her point is plain," Dexter said.  "Any reasonable man would
understand your oath was sworn to protect us from defection.  The
situation has changed, and those you swore to protect may release you
from it."

Boromir muttered something Rose couldn't quite make out.  He turned
from Dexter, casting his eyes around the group, until they settled on
his sister.  Alexandria was still wrapped around his arm, staring
upward, and she gave it a squeeze as they made eye contact.

"A gift, Boromir," she repeated.
